WHERE’S Papa going with that ax?” 
said Fern to her mother as they 
were setting the table for breakfast. 
“Out to the hoghouse,” replied 
Mrs. Arable. “Some pigs were born last night.” 
“I don’t see why he needs an ax,” continued Fern, 
who was only eight. 
“Well,” said her mother, “one of the pigs is a runt. 
It’s very small and weak, and it will never amount to 
anything. So your father has decided to do away with 
it.” 
“Do away with it?” shrieked Fern. “You mean kill 
it? Just because it’s smaller than the others?” 

Mrs. Arable put a pitcher of cream on the table. 
“Don’t yell, Fern!” she said. “Your father is right. The 
pig would probably die anyway.” 

Fern pushed a chair out of the way and ran outdoors. 
The grass was wet and the earth smelled of springtime. 
Fern’s sneakers were sopping by the time she caught 
up with her father. 



“Please don’t kill it!” she sobbed. “It’s unfair.” 

Mr. Arable stopped walking. 

“Fern,” he said gently, “you will have to learn to 
control yourself.” 

“Control myself?” yelled Fern. “This is a matter of 
life and death, and you talk about controlling myself.” 




Before Breakfast 3 

Tears ran down her cheeks and she took hold of the ax 
and tried to pull it out of her father’s hand. 

“Fern,” said Mr. Arable, “I know more about raising 
a litter of pigs than you do. A weakling makes trouble. 
Now run along!” 

“But it’s unfair,” cried Fern. “The pig couldn’t help 
being born small, could it? If 7 had been very small at 
birth, would you have killed me ?” 

Mr. Arable smiled. “Certainly not,” he said, looking 
down at his daughter with love. “But this is different. 
A little girl is one thing, a little runty pig is another.” 

“I see no difference,” replied Fern, still hanging on 
to the ax. “This is the most terrible case of injustice I 
ever heard of.” 

A queer look came over John Arable’s face. He 
seemed almost ready to cry himself. 

“AH right,” he said. “You go back to the house and 
I will bring the runt when I come in. I’ll let you start 
it on a bottle, like a baby. Then you’ll see what trouble 
a pig can be.” 

When Mr. Arable returned to the house half an 
hour later, he carried a carton under his arm. Fern was 
upstairs changing her sneakers. The kitchen table was 
set for breakfast, and the room smelled of coffee, bacon, 
damp plaster, and wood smoke from the stove. 

“Put it on her chair!” said Mrs. Arable. Mr. Arable 
set the carton down at Fern’s place. Then he walked 


4 Charlotte’s Web 

to the sink and washed his hands and dried them on the 
roller towel. 

Fern came slowly down the stairs. Her eyes were 
red from crying. As she approached her chair, the 
carton wobbled, and there was a scratching noise. Fern 
looked at her father. Then she lifted the lid of the car- 
ton. There, inside, looking up at her, was the newborn 
pig. It was a white one. The morning light shone 
through its ears, turning them pink. 

“He’s yours,” said Mr. Arable. “Saved from an un- 
timely death. And may the good Lord forgive me for 
this foolishness.” 

Fern couldn’t take her eyes off the tiny pig. “Oh,” 
she whispered. “Oh, look at him! He’s absolutely per- 
fect.” 

She closed the carton carefully. First she kissed her 
father, then she kissed her mother. Then she opened 
the lid again, lifted the pig out, and held it against 
her cheek. At this moment her brother Avery came 
into the room. Avery was ten. He was heavily armed 
— an air rifle in one hand, a wooden dagger in the 
other. 

“What’s that?” he demanded. “What’s Fern got?” 

“She’s got a guest for breakfast,” said Mrs. Arable. 
“Wash your hands and face, Avery!” 

“Let’s see it!” said Avery, setting his gun down. 
“You call that miserable thing a pig? That’s a fine 



specimen of a pig — it’s no bigger than a white rat.” 
“Wash up and eat your breakfast, Avery!” said his 
mother. “The school bus will be along in half an hour.” 
“Can I have a pig, too. Pop?” asked Avery. 

“No, I only distribute pigs to early risers,” said Mr. 
Arable. “Fern was up at daylight, trying to rid the 
world of injustice. As a result, she now has a pig. A 
small one, to be sure, but nevertheless a pig. It just 
shows what can happen if a person gets out of bed 
promptly. Let’s eat!” 

But Fern couldn’t eat until her pig had had a drink 
of milk. Mrs. Arable found a baby’s nursing bottle and 
a rubber nipple. She poured warm milk into the bottle, 



fitted the nipple over the top, and handed it to Fern. 
“Give him his breakfast!” she said. 

A minute later, Fern was seated on the floor in the 
comer of the kitchen with her infant between her 



Before Breakfast 7 

knees, teaching it to suck from the bottle. The pig, 
although tiny, had a good appetite and caught on 
quickly. 

The school bus honked from the road. 

“Run!” commanded Mrs. Arable, taking the pig 
from Fern and slipping a doughnut into her hand. 
Avery grabbed his gun and another doughnut. 

The children ran out to the road and climbed into 
the bus. Fern took no notice of the others in the bus. 
She just sat and stared out of the window, thinking 
what a blissful world it was and how lucky she was to 
have entire charge of a pig. By the time the bus reached 
school, Fern had named her pet, selecting the most 
beautiful name she could think of. 

“Its name is Wilbur,” she whispered to herself. 

She was still thinking about the pig when the teacher 
said: “Fern, what is the capital of Pennsylvania?” 

“Wilbur,” replied Fern, dreamily. The pupils gig- 
gled. Fern blushed. 




Wilbur 


F ERN loved Wilbur more than anything. She 
loved to stroke him, to feed him, to put him to 
bed. Every morning, as soon as she got up, she 
warmed his milk, tied his bib on, and held the 
bottle for him. Every afternoon, when the school bus 
stopped in front of her house, she jumped out and ran 
to the kitchen to fix another bottle for him. She fed 
him again at suppertime, and again just before going to 
bed. Mrs. Arable gave him a feeding around noontime 
each day, when Fern was away in school. Wilbur 
loved his milk, and he was never happier than when 
Fern was warming up a bottle for him. He would 
stand and gaze up at her with adoring eyes. 

For the first few days of his life, Wilbur was allowed 
to live in a box near the stove in the kitchen. Then, 
when Mrs. Arable complained, he was moved to a big- 
ger box in the woodshed. At two weeks of age, he was 
moved outdoors. It was apple-blossom time, and the 
days were getting warmer. Mr. Arable fixed a small 
yard specially for Wilbur under an apple tree, and 

8 


Wilbur 9 

gave him a large wooden box full of straw, with a 
doorway cut in it so he could walk in and out as he 
pleased. 

“Won’t he be cold at night?” asked Fern. 

“No,” said her father. “You watch and see what he 
does.” 

Carrying a bottle of milk, Fern sat down under the 



apple tree inside the yard. Wilbur ran to her and she 
held the bottle for him while he sucked. When he had 
finished the last drop, he grunted and walked sleepily 
into the box. Fern peered through the door. Wilbur 
was poking the straw with his snout. In a short time 
he had dug a tunnel in the straw. He crawled into the 
tunnel and disappeared from sight, completely cov- 
ered with straw. Fern was enchanted. It relieved her 
mind to know that her baby would sleep covered up, 
and would stay warm. 


io Charlotte’s Web 

Every morning after breakfast, Wilbur walked out 
to the road with Fern and waited with her till the bus 
came. She would wave good-bye to him, and he would 
stand and watch the bus until it vanished around a 
turn. While Fern was in school, Wilbur was shut up 
inside his yard. But as soon as she got home in the 
afternoon, she would take him out and he would 
follow her around the place. If she went into the 
house, Wilbur went, too. If she went upstairs, Wilbur 
would wait at the bottom step until she came down 
again. If she took her doll for a walk in the doll car- 
riage, Wilbur followed along. Sometimes, on these 
journeys, Wilbur would get tired, and Fern would pick 
him up and put him in the carriage alongside the doll. 
He liked this. And if he was very tired, he would close 
his eyes and go to sleep under the doll’s blanket. He 
looked cute when his eyes were closed, because his 
lashes were so long. The doll would close her eyes, too, 
and Fern would wheel the carriage very slowly and 
smoothly so as not to wake her infants. 

One warm afternoon. Fern and Avery put on bath- 
ing suits and went down to the brook for a swim. 
Wilbur tagged along at Fern’s heels. When she waded 
into the brook, Wilbur waded in with her. He found 
the water quite cold — too cold for his liking. So while 
the children swam and played and splashed water at 
each other, Wilbur amused himself in the mud along 



the edge of the brook, where it was warm and moist 
and delightfully sticky and oozy. 

Every day was a happy day, and every night was 
peaceful. 

Wilbur was what farmers call a spring pig, which 
simply means that he was born in springtime. When he 


12 Charlotte's Web 

was five weeks old, Mr. Arable said he was now big 
enough to sell, and would have to be sold. Fern broke 
down and wept. But her father was firm about it. Wil- 
bur’s appetite had increased; he was beginning to eat 
scraps of food in addition to milk. Mr. Arable was not 
willing to provide for him any longer. He had already 
sold Wilbur’s ten brothers and sisters. 

“He’s got to go, Fern,” he said. “You have had your 
fun raising a baby pig, but Wilbur is not a baby any 
longer and he has got to be sold.” 

“Call up the Zuckermans,” suggested Mrs. Arable 
to Fern. “Your Uncle Homer sometimes raises a pig. 
And if Wilbur goes there to live, you can walk down 
the road and visit him as often as you like.” 

“How much money should I ask for him?” Fern 
wanted to know. 

“Well,” said her father, “he’s a runt. Tell your 
Uncle Homer you’ve got a pig you’ll sell for six 
dollars, and see what he says.” 

It was soon arranged. Fern phoned and got her 
Aunt Edith, and her Aunt Edith hollered for Uncle 
Homer, and Uncle Homer came in from the barn and 
talked to Fern. When he heard that the price was only 
six dollars, he said he would buy the pig. Next day 
Wilbur was taken from his home under the apple tree 
and went to live in a manure pile in the cellar of Zuck- 
erman’s barn. 


T HE BARN was very large. It was very old. 

It smelled of hay and it smelled of manure. 
It smelled of the perspiration of tired horses 
and the wonderful sweet breath of patient 
cows. It often had a sort of peaceful smell — as though 
nothing bad could happen ever again in the world. It 
smelled of grain and of harness dressing and of axle 
grease and of rubber boots and of new rope. And 
whenever the cat was given a fish-head to eat, the barn 
would smell of fish. But mostly it smelled of hay, for 
there was always hay in the great loft up overhead. 
And there was always hay being pitched down to the 
cows and the horses and the sheep. 

The barn was pleasantly warm in winter when the 
animals spent most of their time indoors, and it was 
pleasantly cool in summer when the big doors stood 
wide open to the breeze. The barn had stalls on the 
main floor for the work horses, tie-ups on the main 
floor for the cows, a sheepfold down below for the 
sheep, a pigpen down below for Wilbur, and it was 


«3 


14 Charlotte's Web 

full of all sorts of things that you find in bams: ladders, 
grindstones, pitch forks, monkey wrenches, scythes, 
lawn mowers, snow shovels, ax handles, milk pails, 
water buckets, empty grain sacks, and rust)’ rat traps. 
It was the kind of barn that swallows like to build their 
nests in. It was the kind of barn that children like to 
play in. And the whole thing was owned by Fern’s 
uncle, Air. Homer L. Zuckerman. 



Wilbur’s new home was in the lower part of the 
bam, directly underneath the cows. Mr. Zuckerman 
knew that a manure pile is a good place to keep a young 
pig. Pigs need warmth, and it was warm and com- 
fortable down there in the barn cellar on the south 
side. 

Fern came almost every day to visit him. She found 



Escape i 5 

an old milking stool that had been discarded, and she 
placed the stool in the sheepfold next to Wilbur’s pen. 
Here she sat quietly during the long afternoons, 
t hinkin g and listening and watching Wilbur. The 



sheep soon got to know her and trust her. So did the 
geese, who lived with the sheep. All the animals trusted 
her, she was so quiet and friendly. Mr. Zuckerman did 
not allow her to take Wilbur out, and he did not allow 


1 6 Charlotte's Web 

her to get into the pigpen. But he told Fern that she 
could sit on the stool and watch Wilbur as long as she 
wanted to. It made her happy just to be near the pig, 
and it made Wilbur happy to know that she was sitting 
there, right outside his pen. But he never had any fun — 
no walks, no rides, no swims. 

One afternoon in June, when Wilbur was almost 
two months old, he wandered out into his small yard 
outside the barn. Fern had not arrived for her usual 
visit. Wilbur stood in the sun feeling lonely and bored. 

“There’s never anything to do around here,” he 
thought. He walked slowly to his food trough and 
sniffed to see if anything had been overlooked at 
lunch. He found a small strip of potato skin and ate it. 
His back itched, so he leaned against the fence and 
rubbed against the boards. When he tired of this, he 
walked indoors, climbed to the top of the manure pile, 
and sat down. He didn’t feel like going to sleep, he 
didn’t feel like digging, he was tired of standing still, 
tired of lying down. “I’m less than two months old and 
I’m tired of living,” he said. He walked out to the yard 
again. 

“When I’m out here,” he said, “there’s no place to 
go but in. When I’m indoors, there’s no place to go but 
out in the yard.” 

“That’s where you’re wrong, my friend, my friend,” 
said a voice. 


Escape i 7 

Wilbur looked through the fence and saw the goose 
standing there. 

“You don’t have to stay in that dirty-little dirty- 
little dirty-little yard,” said the goose, who talked 
rather fast. “One of the boards is loose. Push on it, 
push-push-push on it, and come on out!” 

“What?” said Wilbur. “Say it slower!” 

“At-at-at, at the risk of repeating myself,” said the 
goose, “I suggest that you come on out. It’s wonderful 
out here.” 

“Did you say a board was loose?” 

“That I did, that I did,” said the goose. 

Wilbur walked up to the fence and saw that the 
goose was right — one board was loose. He put his head 
down, shut his eyes, and pushed. The board gave way. 
In a minute he had squeezed through the fence and 
was standing in the long grass outside his yard. The 
goose chuckled. 

“How does it feel to be free?” she asked. 

“I like it,” said Wilbur. “That is, I guess I like it.” 
Actually, Wilbur felt queer to be outside his fence, 
with nothing between him and the big world. 

“Where do you think I’d better go?” 

“Anywhere you like, anywhere you like,” said the 
goose. “Go down through the orchard, root up the 
sod! Go down through the garden, dig up the radishes! 
Root up everything! Eat grass! Look for corn! Look 


1 8 Charlotte’ s W eb 

for oats! Run all over! Skip and dance, jump and 
prance! Go down through the orchard and stroll in 
the woods! The world is a wonderful place when 
you’re young.” 

“I can see that,” replied Wilbur. He gave a jump in 
the air, twirled, ran a few steps, stopped, looked all 
around, sniffed the smells of afternoon, and then set 
off walking down through the orchard. Pausing in the 
shade of an apple tree, he put his strong snout into the 
ground and began pushing, digging, and rooting. He 
felt very happy. He had plowed up quite a piece of 
ground before anyone noticed him. Mrs. Zuckerman 
was the first to see him. She saw him from the kitchen 
window, and she immediately shouted for the men. 

“Ho -mer\” she cried. “Pig’s out! Lurvy! Pig’s out! 
Homer! Lurvy! Pig’s out. He’s down there under that 
apple tree.” 

“Now the trouble starts,” thought Wilbur. “Now 
I’ll catch it.” 

The goose heard the racket and she, too, started 
hollering. “Run-run-run downhill, make for the 
woods, the woods!” she shouted to Wilbur. “They’ll 
never-never-never catch you in the woods.” 

The cocker spaniel heard the commotion and he ran 
out from the barn to join the chase. Mr. Zuckerman 
heard, and he came out of the machine shed where he 
was mending a tool. Lurvy, the hired man, heard the 


Escape 1 9 

noise and came up from the asparagus patch where he 
was pulling weeds. Everybody walked toward Wilbur 
and Wilbur didn’t know what to do. The woods seemed 
a long way off, and anyway, he had never been down 
there in the woods and wasn’t sure he would like it. 

“Get around behind him, Lurvy,” said Mr. Zucker- 
man, “and drive him toward the barn! And take it 
easy — don’t rush him! I’ll go and get a bucket of slops.” 
The news of Wilbur’s escape spread rapidly among 
the animals on the place. Whenever any creature broke 
loose on Zuckerman’s farm, the event was of great 
interest to the others. The goose shouted to the nearest 
cow that Wilbur was free, and soon all the cows knew. 
Then one of the cows told one of the sheep, and soon 
all the sheep knew. The lambs learned about it from 
their mothers. The horses, in their stalls in the barn, 
pricked up their ears when they heard the goose hol- 
lering; and soon the horses had caught on to what was 
happening. “Wilbur’s out,” they said. Every animal 
stirred and lifted its head and became excited to know 
that one of his friends had got free and was no longer 
penned up or tied fast. 

Wilbur didn’t know what to do or which way to 
run. It seemed as though everybody was after him. “If 
this is what it’s like to be free,” he thought, “I believe 
I’d rather be penned up in my own yard.” 

The cocker spaniel was sneaking up on him from one 



side, Lurvy the hired man was sneaking up on him 
from the other side. Mrs. Zuckerman stood ready to 
head him off if he started for the garden, and now Mr. 
Zuckerman was coming down toward him carrying a 
pail. “This is really awful,” thought Wilbur. “Why 
doesn’t Fern come?” He began to cry. 

The goose took command and began to give orders. 
“Don’t just stand there, Wilbur! Dodge about, 
dodge about!” cried the goose. “Skip around, run 
toward me, slip in and out, in and out, in and out! 
Make for the woods! Twist and turn!” 

The cocker spaniel sprang for Wilbur’s hind leg. 
Wilbur jumped and ran. Lurvy reached out and 
grabbed. Mrs. Zuckerman screamed at Lurvy. The 
goose cheered for Wilbur. Wilbur dodged between 


Escape 2 1 

Lurvy’s legs. Lurvy missed Wilbur and grabbed the 
spaniel instead. “Nicely done, nicely done!” cried the 
goose. “Try it again, try it again!” 

“Run downhill!” suggested the cows. 

“Run toward me!” yelled the gander. 

“Run uphill! ” cried the sheep. 

“Turn and twist!” honked the goose. 

“Jump and dance!” said the rooster. 



22 


Charlotte's Web 

“Look out for Lurvy!” called the cows. 

“Look out for Zuckerman! ” yelled the gander. 

“Watch out for the dog!” cried the sheep. 

“Listen to me, listen to me!” screamed the goose. 

Poor Wilbur was dazed and frightened by this hulla- 
baloo. He didn’t like being the center of all this fuss. 
He tried to follow the instructions his friends were 
giving him, but he couldn’t run downhill and uphill 
at the same time, and he couldn’t turn and twist when 
he was jumping and dancing, and he was crying so 
hard he could barely see anything that was happening. 
After all, Wilbur was a very young pig — not much 
more than a baby, really. He wished Fern were there 
to take him in her arms and comfort him. When he 
looked up and saw Mr. Zuckerman standing quite close 
to him, holding a pail of warm slops, he felt relieved. 
He lifted his nose and sniffed. The smell was delicious 
— warm milk, potato skins, wheat middlings, Kellogg’s 
Corn Flakes, and a popover left from the Zuckermans’ 
breakfast. 

“Come, pig!” said Mr. Zuckerman, tapping the pail. 
“Come pig!” 

Wilbur took a step toward the pail. 

“No-no-no!” said the goose. “It’s the old pail trick, 
Wilbur. Don’t fall for it, don’t fall for it! He’s trying 
to lure you back into captivity-ivity. He’s appealing 
to your stomach.” 


Escape 2 3 

Wilbur didn’t care. The food smelled appetizing. 
He took another step toward the pail. 

“Pig, pig!” said Mr. Zuckerman in a kind voice, and 
began walking slowly toward the barnyard, looking all 
about him innocently, as if he didn’t know that a little 
white pig was following along behind him. 

“You’ll be sorry-sorry-sorry,” called the goose. 

Wilbur didn’t care. He kept walking toward the 
pail of slops. 

“You’ll miss your freedom,” honked the goose. “An 
hour of freedom is worth a barrel of slops.” 

Wilbur didn’t care. 

When Mr. Zuckerman reached the pigpen, he 
climbed over the fence and poured the slops into the 
trough. Then he pulled the loose board away from the 
fence, so that there was a wide hole for Wilbur to walk 
through. 

“Reconsider, reconsider!” cried the goose. 

Wilbur paid no attention. He stepped through the 
fence into his yard. He walked to the trough and took 
a long drink of slops, sucking in the milk hungrily and 
chewing the popover. It was good to be home again. 

While Wilbur ate, Lurvy fetched a hammer and 
some 8-penny nails and nailed the board in place. Then 
he and Mr. Zuckerman leaned lazily on the fence and 
Mr. Zuckerman scratched Wilbur’s back with a stick. 

“He’s quite a pig,” said Lurvy. 


24 Charlotte’s Web 

“Yes, he’ll make a good pig,” said Mr. Zuckerman. 

Wilbur heard the words of praise. He felt the warm 
milk inside his stomach. He felt the pleasant rubbing 
of the stick along his itchy back. He felt peaceful and 
happy and sleepy. This had been a tiring afternoon. It 
was still only about four o’clock but Wilbur was ready 
for bed. 

“I’m really too young to go out into the world 
alone,” he thought as he lay down. 




Loneliness 


T HE NEXT day was rainy and dark. Rain 
fell on the roof of the barn and dripped 
steadily from the eaves. Rain fell in the 
barnyard and ran in crooked courses down 
into the lane where thistles and pigweed grew. Rain 
spattered against Mrs. Zuckerman’s kitchen windows 
and came gushing out of the downspouts. Rain fell on 
the backs of the sheep as they grazed in the meadow. 
When the sheep tired of standing in the rain, they 
walked slowly up the lane and into the fold. 

Rain upset Wilbur’s plans. Wilbur had planned to 
go out, this day, and dig a new hole in his yard. He had 
other plans, too. His plans for the day went something 
like this: 

Breakfast at six-thirty. Skim milk, crusts, middlings, 
bits of doughnuts, wheat cakes with drops of maple 
syrup sticking to them, potato skins, leftover custard 
pudding with raisins, and bits of Shredded Wheat. 
Breakfast would be finished at seven. 

From seven to eight, Wilbur planned to have a talk 


26 


Charlotte's Web 


with Templeton, the rat that lived under his trough. 
Talking with Templeton was not the most interesting 
occupation in the world but it was better than nothing. 

From eight to nine, Wilbur planned to take a nap 
outdoors in the sun. 

From nine to eleven he planned to dig a hole, or 
trench, and possibly find something good to eat buried 
in the dirt. 

From eleven to twelve he planned to stand still and 
watch flies on the boards, watch bees in the clover, and 
watch swallows in the air. 

Twelve o’clock — lunchtime. Middlings, warm 
water, apple parings, meat gravy, carrot scrapings, meat 
scraps, stale hominy, and the wrapper off a package of 
cheese. Lunch would be over at one. 

From one to two, Wilbur planned to sleep. 

From two to three, he planned to scratch itchy places 
by rubbing against the fence. 

From three to four, he planned to stand perfectly 
still and think of what it was like to be alive, and to 
wait for Fern. 

At four would come supper. Skim milk, provender, 
leftover sandwich from Lurvy’s lunchbox, prune skins, 
a morsel of this, a bit of that, fried potatoes, marmalade 
drippings, a little more of this, a little more of that, a 
piece of baked apple, a scrap of upsidedown cake. 

Wilbur had gone to sleep thinking about these plans. 


Loneliness 


2 7 

He awoke at six and saw the rain, and it seemed as 
though he couldn’t bear it. 

“I get everything all beautifully planned out and it 
has to go and rain,” he said. 

For a while he stood gloomily indoors. Then he 
walked to the door and looked out. Drops of rain struck 
his face. His yard was cold and wet. His trough had an 
inch of rainwater in it. Templeton was nowhere to be 
seen. 

“Are you out there, Templeton?” called Wilbur. 
There was no answer. Suddenly Wilbur felt lonely and 
friendless. 

“One day just like another,” he groaned. “I’m very 
young, I have no real friend here in the barn, it’s going 
to rain all morning and all afternoon, and Fern won’t 
come in such bad weather. Oh, honestly !” And Wil- 
bur was crying again, for the second time in two days. 

At six-thirty Wilbur heard the banging of a pail. 
Lurvy was standing outside in the rain, stirring up 
breakfast. 

“C’mon, pig!” said Lurvy. 

Wilbur did not budge. Lurvy dumped the slops, 
scraped the pail, and walked away. He noticed that 
something was wrong with the pig. 

Wilbur didn’t want food, he wanted love. He 
wanted a friend — someone who would play with 
him. He mentioned this to the goose, who was sit- 


28 


Charlotte’s Web 

ting quietly in a corner of the sheepfold. 

“Will you come over and play with me?” he asked. 

“Sorry, sonny, sorry,” said the goose. “I’m sitting- 
sitting on my eggs. Eight of them. Got to keep them 
toasty-oasty-oasty warm. I have to stay right here, I’m 
no flibberty-ibberty-gibbet. I do not play when there 
are eggs to hatch. I’m expecting goslings.” 

“Well, I didn’t think you were expecting wood- 
peckers,” said Wilbur, bitterly. 

Wilbur next tried one of the lambs. 

“Will you please play with me?” he asked. 

“Certainly not,” said the lamb. “In the first place, I 
cannot get into your pen, as I am not old enough to 
jump over the fence. In the second place, I am not in- 
terested in pigs. Pigs mean less than nothing to me.” 

“What do you mean, less than nothing?” replied 
Wilbur. “I don’t think there is any such thing as less 
than nothing. Nothing is absolutely the limit of noth- 
ingness. It’s the lowest you can go. It’s the end of the 
line. How can something be less than nothing? If there 
were something that was less than nothing, then noth- 
ing would not be nothing, it would be something — 
even though it’s just a very little bit of something. But 
if nothing is nothing , then nothing has nothing that is 
less than it is.” 

“Oh, be quiet!” said the lamb. “Go play by yourself! 
I don’t play with pigs.” 


Loneliness 


2 9 

Sadly, Wilbur lay down and listened to the rain. 
Soon he saw the rat climbing down a slanting board 
that he used as a stairway. 

“Will you play with me, Templeton?” asked Wil- 
bur. 



“Play?” said Templeton, twirling his whiskers. 
“Play? I hardly know the meaning of the word.” 
“Well,” said Wilbur, “it means to have fun, to frolic, 
to run and skip and make merry.” 

“I never do those things if I can avoid them,” replied 
the rat, sourly. “I prefer to spend my time eating, gnaw- 
ing, spying, and hiding. I am a glutton but not a merry- 


30 Charlotte’s Web 

maker. Right now I am on my way to your trough to 
eat your breakfast, since you haven’t got sense enough 
to eat it yourself.” And Templeton, the rat, crept 
stealthily along the wall and disappeared into a private 
tunnel that he had dug between the door and the trough 
in Wilbur’s yard. Templeton was a crafty rat, and he 
had things pretty much his own way. The tunnel was 
an example of his skill and cunning. The tunnel en- 
abled him to get from the barn to his hiding place under 
the pig trough without coming out into the open. He 
had tunnels and runways all over Mr. Zuckerman’s 
farm and could get from one place to another without 
being seen. Usually he slept during the daytime and was 
abroad only after dark. 

Wilbur watched him disappear into his tunnel. In a 
moment he saw the rat’s sharp nose poke out from un- 
derneath the wooden trough. Cautiously Templeton 
pulled himself up over the edge of the trough. This was 
almost more than Wilbur could stand: on this dreary, 
rainy day to see his breakfast being eaten by somebody 
else. He knew Templeton was getting soaked, out there 
in the pouring rain, but even that didn’t comfort him. 
Friendless, dejected, and hungry, he threw himself 
down in the manure and sobbed. 

Late that afternoon, Lurvy went to Mr. Zuckerman. 
“I think there’s something wrong with that pig of 
yours. He hasn’t touched his food.” 


Loneliness 3 1 

“Give him two spoonfuls of sulphur and a little mo- 
lasses,” said Mr. Zuckerman. 

Wilbur couldn’t believe what was happening to him 
when Lurvy caught him and forced the medicine down 
his throat. This was certainly the worst day of his life. 
He didn’t know whether he could endure the awful 
loneliness any more. 



Darkness settled over everything. Soon there were 
only shadows and the noises of the sheep chewing their 
cuds, and occasionally the rattle of a cow-chain up 
overhead. You can imagine Wilbur’s surprise when, 
out of the darkness, came a small voice he had never 
heard before. It sounded rather thin, but pleasant. “Do 
you want a friend, Wilbur?” it said. “I’ll be a friend to 
you. I’ve watched you all day and I like you.” 

“But I can’t see you,” said Wilbur, jumping to his 
feet. “Where are you? And who are you?” 

“I’m right up here,” said the voice. “Go to sleep. 
You’ll see me in the morning.” 


Charlotte 


T HE NIGHT seemed long. Wilbur’s stom- 
ach was empty and his mind was full. And 
when your stomach is empty and your mind 
is full, it’s always hard to sleep. 

A dozen times during the night Wilbur woke and 
stared into the blackness, listening to the sounds and 
trying to figure out what time it was. A barn is never 
perfectly quiet. Even at midnight there is usually some- 
thing stirring. 

The first time he woke, he heard Templeton gnaw- 
ing a hole in the grain bin. Templeton’s teeth scraped 
loudly against the wood and made quite a racket. “That 
crazy rat!” thought Wilbur. “Why does he have to 
stay up all night, grinding his dashers and destroying 
people’s property? Why can’t he go to sleep, like any 
decent animal?” 

The second time Wilbur woke, he heard the goose 
turning on her nest and chuckling to herself. 

“What time is it?” whispered Wilbur to the goose. 


32 


Charlotte 3 3 

“Probably-obably-obably about half-past eleven,” 
said the goose. “Why aren’t you asleep, Wilbur?” 

“Too many things on my mind,” said Wilbur. 

“Well,” said the goose, “that’s not my trouble. I have 
nothing at all on my mind, but I’ve too many things 
under my behind. Have you ever tried to sleep while 
sitting on eight eggs?” 

“No,” replied Wilbur. “I suppose it is uncomforta- 
ble. How long does it take a goose egg to hatch?” 

“Approximately-oximately thirty days, all told,” an- 
swered the goose. “But I cheat a little. On warm after- 
noons, I just pull a little straw over the eggs and go out 
for a walk.” 

Wilbur yawned and went back to sleep. In his dreams 
he heard again the voice saying, “I’ll be a friend to you. 
Go to sleep — you’ll see me in the morning.” 

About half an hour before dawn, Wilbur woke and 
listened. The barn was still dark. The sheep lay motion- 
less. Even the goose was quiet. Overhead, on the main 
floor, nothing stirred: the cows were resting, the horses 





